---
title: homework 3
section: homeworks
layout: default
due: Monday, October 14, at 11:59 PM
---

### Homework 3: Write your own shell

[Assignment checkout](https://classroom.github.com/a/aBe2TfbK)

#### Background

One of the fundamental functionalities of Linux (and Linux-like OSs) is the ability to pipe commands. When the `|` character is used in a shell between two commands, the shell takes the output from the first command and "pipes" it to the second command as the input. You can try it yourself! If you run the command `ls -la / | grep tmp` on systems1, you should be able to see only the `tmp` directory output from `ls -la`. This is because you gave `grep`, a common search tool, the output of `ls -la` directly. There are many more applications of piping but that is for you to discover as necessary in your adventures/projects/jobs/etc etc etc.

#### The programming part

For this assignment you are to write a simple program that will act as a shell. The program should:

* Display a command prompt and read in a command line from the user (the prompt must be `CS361 >`, otherwise it cannot be detected by the test script)
* Your shell must support basic piping like the unix shell. 
  1. `$ command` Run command, with stdin and stdout connected to their usual files. When `command` finishes, the parent should output `pid:%d status:%d\n` (with the proper relevant values inserted into the format string), and then print the prompt again and wait for more input.
  2. `$ command1 | command2` Run command1 as in #1, but redirects the output of command1 as input to command2. Note that there should be two instances of `pid:%d status:%d\n` output.
  3. `$ command1 ; command2` Run command1 as in #1, wait for it to finish, and then run command 2 as in #1. 

Also...
* Your shell should handle the following signals:
	* SIGINT - Generated by `Ctrl-C`. This signal allows a user to terminate a running program. Your shell should not exit when user presses `Ctrl-C` or the process receives SIGINT but simply report that the SIGINT signal has been received by the shell. If the process receives SIGINT, you must print the string "caught sigint" on a line by itself, and then show the prompt again.
	* SIGTSTP - Generated by `Ctrl-Z`. This signal allows a user to terminate a running program. Your shell should not exit when user presses `Ctrl-Z` or the process receives SIGTSTP but simply report that the SIGTSTP signal has been received by the shell. If your shell receives SIGTSTP, you must print the string "caught sigstp" on a line by itself, and then show the prompt again.
* The shell does NOT need to support background processes, running more than one child at a time, or handling multiple chained pipes. Essentially, if anything not matching the use cases/requirements above is in question, you probably do not have to do it. Due to the breadth of this assignment, it is difficult to clarify every case in writing. Please ask in office hours or on Piazza if you have questions or need clarification.

#### Tips for primary components

* Parse the command line into arguments, creating an array of character pointers, where array[0] points to the actual command and rest of the array elements point to the arguments to the command (Similar to `main()`'s `argv[]`)
* Fork off a child and have the child load the requested program by passing the argument vector created in step 2 to exec() family of system calls. The parent should report the PID of the child before proceeding to the next step. (report means you are required to return strings contain "pid" and "status", e.g. `pid:11111  status:0`)
* Wait for the child to complete executing and report why it ended (exited or uncaught signal) and its exit value if available.
* Repeat the first step forever until the user enters the command `exit`

#### Your personal repository

Note that there is *no* skeleton code for the homework. Going to lab sections is highly advisable, as the TAs have been and will be explaining basics of getting started with a shell. Both the lab section code, as well as code found in the book or book slides, are "fair game" from which to begin your coding. Previous solutions, or other students' work, are off limits and any cheating will be prosecuted to the fullest extent of university rules. *There are solutions on the Internet.* If we find you using them, we will give you an F in the class.  Don't look at them, don't use them. It is not worth it.

### Requirements

See above, but here is a summary:
1. Display a command prompt (`CS361 >`) and read in a command line from the user
2. Handle `$ command` (run command, with stdin and stdout connected to their usual files, must additionally output `pid:%d status:%d\n`, then continue)
3. Handle `$ command1 | command2` (run command1 as in #1, but redirects the output of command1 as input to command2, then continue)
4. Handle `$ command1 ; command2` (run command1 as in #1, wait for it to finish, and then run command 2 as in #1, then continue)
5. Handle SIGINT - Generated by `Ctrl-C` (print "caught sigint" and then continue)
6. Handle SIGTSTP - Generated by `Ctrl-Z` (print "caught sigstp" and then continue)

It is **highly** recommended you develop and test your code on systems1 or a similar Linux environment. This is simply to ensure standardization of comparisons between our and your tests whilst you are developing your code.

When you turn in the assignment, the TA should be able to compile your program by running `gcc -Wall -Werror -o hw3 hw3.c` in the `hw3` directory (case sensitive). You are free to include any files e.g. `hw3.h`, it just has to compile using the above command.

### Grading

Grading will happen using an autograder on [Gradescope](https://www.gradescope.com/courses/61518). 

### Due Date

This assignment is due {{ page.due }}. See the [syllabus](https://www.cs.uic.edu/~ckanich/cs361/f19/syllabus.html) for the late turnin policy. This assignment is worth just as much as every other homework, and they will only get harder from here, so getting as much credit on it as possible is important (don't turn it in late!).
